### Windows host with unprivileged user
You will connect through SSH to a Fedora VM with pre-installed Visual Studio Code. For simplicity, this VM is made reachable through a Tailscale connection, which I will share with your team soon (see instructions in the email I just sent). You are administrators of the VM, meaning you can install whatever you need on the OS yourselves, including the required Python environment. Being the operating system Fedora, you can install applications on the OS using the **dnf** package manager (`sudo dnf install ...`). For the development of Python-based applications, the suggestion is always to rely on virtual environments (e.g., _venv_ or _conda_), once you have installed the Python version you need.

The VM allows for multiple simultaneous SSH connections from the outside, meaning that members of the same team can work simultaneously using the same connection. However, remember that **each team member should work on different scripts and data to avoid writing conflicts. Thus, organize your work accordingly!**

An easy way to connect is by downloading the "Remote SSH" extension onto your local VS Code installation. This will start up the VS Code Server installed on the VM and enable the usage of its resources to run scripts stored locally on the VM. **The credentials to log in to the VM with SSH are the same as those used for the Windows host.**

The VM is hosted on the same PC you can access with Windows' Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP), implying the data and scripts you access and modify are the same with either method. In the VM, the data are mounted on the following path, which is also the one you probably want to open with VS Code (this or one of its subfolders, as you need): */media/sf_<original_folder_name_in_Windows>*
